---
layout: post
author: Keegan McAllister
title:  APRS with the Yaesu FT-2900R
date:   2019-09-23
tags:   aprs radio
---

This is a short write-up about using APRS with the [Yaesu
FT-2900R](https://www.universal-radio.com/catalog/fm_txvrs/2900.html) mobile
radio. For those who aren't familiar,
[APRS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_Packet_Reporting_System) is a
global network which allows sending GPS position updates, text messages, and
other data over ham radio, mainly 2 meter FM. APRS "digipeaters" relay these
messages by radio and "IGates" send them to the Internet, allowing global
communication.

[![An amateur radio connected to a smaller box with a home-built cable.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/01-radio-with-tnc.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/01-radio-with-tnc.jpg)

Here's the radio in action, with a [Mobilinkd
TNC3](https://store.mobilinkd.com/products/mobilinkd-tnc3) at right (more on
this little device later).

The FT-2900R seems to be a great choice for APRS. I receive lots of packets and
even at 5 watts, my packets get through to several digipeaters/IGates in the
area. The FT-2900R can output up to 75 watts; while this is much more than is
typically used for APRS, it could be useful in remote areas far away from other
APRS nodes. Despite its high output power, the FT-2900R is fanless; the entire
case serves as a giant heatsink. As a result, it is built like a tank and will
hold up in demanding environments. Finally, it is affordable on the used
market; I got two for $200 total on
[/r/hamfest](https://www.reddit.com/r/hamfest).

[![An antenna, approximately 2 feet long, sitting on top of a metal tray on a deck railing.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/02-antenna.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/02-antenna.jpg)

My antenna for this test is a
[MFJ-1729](https://www.mfjenterprises.com/Product.php?productid=MFJ-1729)
magnetic mount antenna on top of a metal baking tray, which acts as a primitive
ground plane. A [roll-up
J-pole](https://www.work-sat.com/Antennas_files/FONG-DBJ2.pdf) is another
convenient option for portable use. For a directional link to a faraway
digipeater or IGate, a [homemade
yagi](http://theleggios.net/wb2hol/projects/rdf/tape_bm.htm) might work well.

[![A screenshot from an Android app of APRS station reports.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/03-aprsdroid.png)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/03-aprsdroid.png)

The Mobilinkd connects to my Android phone over Bluetooth. Using
[APRSdroid](https://aprsdroid.org) I can send position reports, see a list or
map of other stations, and send and receive text messages. I can even use
[SMS](https://smsgte.org) and [email](https://winlink.org/APRSLink) through
appropriate gateway services. This could be quite useful in a remote area with
no cell coverage, or in an emergency where the cell network is down. (Note
that, like everything on ham radio, APRS messages are [public
information](https://aprs.link/app/aprs/stations/messages-SMSGTE).)

![A Google Maps overlay showing my position.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/04-map.png)

Because my position updates reach an IGate, my location appears on
[aprs.fi](https://aprs.fi).

![A list of stations near me and stations that can hear
me.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/05-station-list.png)

In addition to the map, a lot of other station information is available on the
website.  As you can see, a number of nodes are able to hear me — the top 3 at
only 5 watts.

# The cable

The big disadvantage of the FT-2900R in this application is that I had to build
a strange custom cable to connect it to the TNC.  APRS packets are
[encoded](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bell_202_modem) as audio tones sent
over FM radio. The TNC is a modem[^1]; it *mo*dulates bytes into tones and
*dem*odulates the incoming tones back to bytes, very much like the modems we
once used for dial-up internet. Its interface to the radio consists of
bidirectional analog audio, plus a "push-to-talk" (PTT) signal which tells the
radio when to transmit. Newer Yaesu radios have a [dedicated "DATA"
jack](https://www.soundcardpacket.org/7miniDIN.aspx) on the rear which provides
all of these signals; however, the FT-2900R does not.

[![A three-headed cable with one phone-style RJ12 plug and two headphone-style
plugs.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/06-the-cable.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/06-the-cable.jpg)

The workaround is this three-headed cable...

[![Close-up of the cable plugged into the front of the radio.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/07-front-connector.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/07-front-connector.jpg)

...which plugs into the front-panel microphone jack...

[![Close-up of the cable plugged into the rear of the
radio.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/08-rear-connector.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/08-rear-connector.jpg)

...and also the rear speaker jack.

[![Side view of the radio. The three parts of the cable merge within a piece of
heat-shrink
tubing.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/09-side-view.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/09-side-view.jpg)

These two connections are spliced onto the cable which connects to the TNC. A
piece of heat-shrink tubing covers the splice.

[![Overall view of the cable as routed around the radio.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/10-cable-installed.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/10-cable-installed.jpg)

Once zip-tied to the chassis, the wiring is relatively tidy.

# Building the cable

The cable was not too difficult to make. If you have a bit of soldering
experience, it should take only an hour or so. I started with a RJ12 patch
cable, a 3.5mm TS plug for the speaker jack, and a 3.5mm TRRS plug for the TNC.

[![Wires held by a "helping hands" soldering tool, in the process of being spliced.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/11-build-1.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/11-build-1.jpg)

Here I have just finished splicing the three microphone-jack connections
(audio, PTT, and ground), the two speaker-jack connections (audio and ground)
and the TNC side of the cable. The three wires at the top left remain
unconnected; they connect to the pins on the RJ12 jack that aren't used for
this project.

[![The finished splices.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/12-build-2.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/12-build-2.jpg)

Bundled up and ready for the outer heat shrink.

[![Soldering to a TRRS plug.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/13-build-3.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/13-build-3.jpg)

The hardest part was soldering the TRRS plug, especially the inner pin. After
all four wires were connected, I crimped the tabs (bottom left of connector)
around the cable. I did the same on the speaker plug (not shown).

[![Two printouts with handwritten notes about wire colors.](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/small/14-build-notes.jpg)](/skywave/assets/2019-09-23-ft2900r-aprs/orig/14-build-notes.jpg)

I made notes about the color of each wire so I could connect everything
correctly. The printouts are from [this
page](http://kf3g25cw.altervista.org/Links/FT-2900R_MFJ-1270X_Cable/FT-2900R_MFJ-1270X_Cable.01.html)
and [the Mobilinkd TNC3
manual](https://mobilinkd.s3.amazonaws.com/TNC3/MobilinkdTNC3.pdf).

# Future plans

My long-term plan is to replace the TNC with a [Raspberry Pi running
Direwolf](https://github.com/wb2osz/direwolf/blob/master/doc/Raspberry-Pi-APRS.pdf)
and put everything in an ammo can. Then I will have a rugged, self-contained
digipeater that I can deploy in a remote area or for emergency use.  I can, for
example, carry my handheld radio and the Mobilinkd and use APRS whenever I am within
radio range of the portable digipeater.

For power I'll use my [solar battery
box](/skywave/2019/07/15/solar-battery.html) or any other 12V (really ≈13V)
power supply. The digipeater can also report its own status (battery voltage,
temperature, etc.) over APRS. I'll include an external WiFi antenna for IGate
functionality when an Internet connection is available. Other possibilities
include a GPS receiver and 3G/LTE connectivity.

Of course, the cable I made is not limited to APRS. I could use it for [AX.25
networking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AX.25), DTMF-based remote control of
some device, a voice mailbox system or anything else that involves a computer
sending and receiving audio on 2 meter FM.

Although everything seems to be working great, I do worry about RF interference
into the audio cables. If that becomes a problem, I will try shielded audio
cables.  A metal ammo can, with openings much smaller than 2 meters, will also
provide some shielding.

Thanks for reading and stay tuned for updates on this project!

# Footnotes

[^1]: TNC stands for [terminal node controller](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terminal_node_controller). These were originally quite feature-rich devices, but over time more and more functionality has been moved into the host — in this case, my Android phone. The Mobilinkd TNC3 is just a modem which speaks a very simple [frame-based serial protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KISS_(TNC)) with the host. It doesn't know anything about APRS per se.
